>> Woodruff: GOOD EVENING, I'M
JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
TONIGHT:
AFRAID IN AMERICA: FROM THE
THREAT OF ATTACKS AT HOME, TO
THE DANGERS OF DIVISIVE
LANGUAGE.
WHAT'S DRIVING THE FEAR, AND HOW
CAN WE HEAL OUR WOUNDS?
>> Ifill: ALSO AHEAD THIS
TUESDAY: FIGHTING FOR ISIS.
NEW DATA ON THOSE HEADING TO
IRAQ AND SYRIA TO JOIN THE
JIHADISTS.
>> Woodruff: AND, MAKING SENSE
OF HOW REAL ESTATE DEVELOPERS
ARE CASHING IN ON A LITTLE KNOWN
IMMIGRATION PROGRAM.
>> INVESTMENTS ARE SUPPOSED TO
BE A MILLION DOLLARS UNLESS IT'S
IN A RURAL AREA OR IN AN AREA OF
HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT.
GUESS WHAT?
EVERY PROJECT IS FINAGLED INTO A
"HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT AREA."
>> Ifill: ALL THAT AND MORE
ON TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: HOW TO RESPOND TO
THE THREAT OF TERROR?
THAT QUESTION DOMINATED ACTION
IN CONGRESS AND THE PRESIDENTIAL
RACE TODAY.
ONE RESPONSE CAME IN THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES, LATE THIS
AFTERNOON, AS LAWMAKERS VOTED
OVERWHELMINGLY FOR NEW CURBS ON
WHO IS ADMITTED TO ENTER THE
UNITED STATES.
>> Woodruff: THE PUSH IN THE
HOUSE WAS TO END THE PRACTICE OF
NOT REQUIRING ENTRANCE VISAS FOR
ANYONE WHO HAS BEEN TO IRAQ OR
SYRIA-- AMONG OTHER PLACES-- IN
RECENT YEARS.
CURRENTLY, PEOPLE FROM 38
COUNTRIES QUALIFY FOR THE VISA
WAIVERS, BUT HOUSE MAJORITY
LEADER KEVIN McCARTHY SAID THAT
TIME HAS PASSED.
>> THAT YOU HAVE MORE THAN 5,000
INDIVIDUALS THAT HAVE WESTERN
PASSPORTS IN THIS PROGRAM THAT
HAVE GONE TO IRAQ OR SYRIA IN
THE LAST FIVE YEARS.
THOSE ARE GAPS THAT WE NEED TO
FIX.
>> Woodruff: DEMOCRATS JOINED IN
SUPPORTING THE BILL, BUT THEY
ALSO INSISTED THE HOUSE ADDRESS
GUN CONTROL.
MINORITY LEADER NANCY PELOSI AND
OTHERS CALLED FOR A BAN ON
LETTING PEOPLE BUY GUNS IF THEY
ARE ON A TERRORISM "WATCH LIST."
>> WE MUST NOT ONLY HAVE MOMENTS
OF SILENCE, WE MUST HAVE DAYS OF
ACTION.
IT'S NOT JUST THE HIGH PROFILE
OCCASIONS, AS MUCH AS THEY
CHALLENGE OUR CONSCIENCE AND
TEAR AT OUR HEART STRINGS, IT'S
THE EVERY-DAY VIOLENCE IN OUR
COUNTRY THAT MUST BE ADDRESSED.
>> Woodruff: SOME REPUBLICANS
ARGUED SUCH A MEASURE PUNISHES
PEOPLE WHO ARE WRONGLY SUSPECTED
OF TERRORIST LINKS.
THE DEBATES ON BOTH GUNS AND
VISAS FOLLOW ATTACKS BY ISLAMIST
EXTREMISTS LAST MONTH IN PARIS,
AND LAST WEEK IN SAN BERNARDINO,
CALIFORNIA, AS WELL AS OTHER
MASS SHOOTINGS.
A MORE DRASTIC RESPONSE CAME
MONDAY FROM DONALD TRUMP, THE
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
FRONTRUNNER.
>> DONALD J. TRUMP IS CALLING
FOR A TOTAL AND COMPLETE
SHUTDOWN OF MUSLIMS ENTERING THE
UNITED STATES UNTIL OUR
COUNTRY'S REPRESENTATIVES CAN
FIGURE OUT WHAT THE HELL IS
GOING ON.
(CHEERS)
>> Woodruff: MANY OF HIS
REPUBLICAN RIVALS TOOK ISSUE
WITH TRUMP, AS DID REPUBLICAN
HOUSE SPEAKER PAUL RYAN, TODAY:
>> THIS IS NOT CONSERVATISM.
WHAT WAS PROPOSED YESTERDAY IS
NOT WHAT THIS PARTY STANDS FOR.
AND MORE IMPORTANTLY, IT'S NOT
WHAT THIS COUNTRY STANDS FOR.
>> Woodruff: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION BLASTED THE
STATEMENT: THE SECRETARIES OF
STATE AND HOMELAND SECURITY
ISSUED REBUKES, AND THE PENTAGON
WARNED THAT SUCH CALLS FEED THE
ISLAMIC STATE'S CLAIM THAT
AMERICA IS AT WAR WITH ISLAM.
WHITE HOUSE SPOKESMAN JOSH
EARNEST WENT EVEN FURTHER:
>> THE TRUMP CAMPAIGN, FOR
MONTHS NOW, HAS HAD A DUSTBIN OF
HISTORY-LIKE QUALITY TO IT.
FROM THE VACUOUS SLOGANEERING,
TO THE OUTRIGHT LIES, EVEN THE
FAKE HAIR, THE WHOLE CARNIVAL
BARKER ROUTINE THAT WE'VE SEEN
FOR SOME TIME NOW.
WHAT DONALD TRUMP SAID YESTERDAY
DISQUALIFIES HIM FROM SERVING AS
PRESIDENT.
>> Woodruff: THE TRUMP STATEMENT
ALSO CAME IN FOR SHARP CRITICISM
TODAY FROM A NUMBER OF FOREIGN
GOVERNMENTS.
WE'LL DELVE MORE DEEPLY INTO THE
NEW FEAR OF TERROR ATTACKS, AND
HOW WE'RE EXPRESSING THAT FEAR,
AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
>> Ifill: IN THE DAY'S OTHER
NEWS, SYRIAN REFUGEE FAMILIES
HAVE BEEN ARRIVING IN THE U.S.
OVER THE OBJECTIONS OF STATE
LEADERS.
ON MONDAY, THE ROMAN CATHOLIC
ARCHDIOCESE OF INDIANAPOLIS
RESETTLED A FAMILY OF FOUR
PREVIOUSLY BEEN FORCED TO MOVE
TO CONNECTICUT.
THEY HAD UNDERGONE TWO YEARS OF
SECURITY CHECKS.
SEPARATELY, IN TEXAS, A SYRIAN
FAMILY OF SIX ARRIVED IN THE
DALLAS AREA.
REPUBLICAN GOVERNORS IN BOTH
STATES HAVE CALLED FOR SUCH
REFUGEES TO BE TURNED AWAY.
>> Woodruff: TURKEY'S STATE-RUN
NEWS AGENCY REPORTS SIX
CHILDREN, INCLUDING A BABY,
DROWNED TODAY IN THLATEE ST
MIGRANT TRAGEDY.
THE GROUP OF AFGHAN NATIONALS
WAS TRYING TO GET TO THE GREEK
ISLAND OF CHIOS, WHEN THEIR
RUBBER DINGHY SANK OFF TURKEY'S
AEGEAN COAST.
TURKEY HAS RECENTLY STEPPED UP
EFFORTS TO STOP MIGRANTS FROM
TRYING TO GET TO GREECE BY SEA.
>> Ifill: SECURITY WAS HIGH IN
VATICAN CITY TODAY AS 70,000
PEOPLE FLOCKED TO ST. PETER'S
SQUARE FOR THE START OF A HOLY
YEAR OF MERCY.
5,000 EXTRA POLICE AND SOLDIERS
WERE DEPLOYED AROUND ROME, IN
THE WAKE OF THE PARIS ATTACKS.
POPE FRANCIS TOOK NOTE OF THE
TENSIONS, AS HE ADDRESSED THE
FAITHFUL.
FAITHFUL. >> (
translated): LET US SET
>> (translated): LET US
SET ASIDE ALL FEAR AND DREAD,
FOR
ASIDE ALL FEAR AND DREAD, FOR
THESE DO NOT BEFIT MEN AND WOMEN
WHO ARE LOVED.
INSTEAD, LET US EXPERIENCE THE
JOYF EN OCOUNTERING THAT GRACE
WHICH TRANSFORMS ALL THINGS.
>> Ifill: THE POPE LAUNCHED THE
YEAR-LONG JUBILEE BY OPENING
LARGE BRONZE DOORS AT THE
ENTRANCE OF ST. PETER'S
BASILICA.
CROWDS LATER LINED UP TO CROSS
THE THRESHOLD AS AN ACT OF
PILGRIMAGE.
SIMILAR HOLY DOORS WILL OPEN AT
CATHEDRALS AROUND THE WORLD ON
SUNDAY.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, RECORD-SETTING RAINFALL
HAS THE PORTLAND, OREGON AREA
STRUGGLING WITH FLOODING AND
LANDSLIDES, WITH MORE RAIN DUE
THIS WEEK.
SOME IN PORTLAND WERE FORCED TO
EVACUATE OVERNIGHT AFTER SEVERAL
INCHES OF RAIN TURNED STREETS
AND HIGHWAYS INTO CREEKS.
THE DOWNPOURS ALSO SENT SEWAGE
OVERFLOWING INTO THE WILLAMETTE
RIVER.
>> Ifill: FEWER AMERICANS ARE
HAVING TROUBLE PAYING FOR THEIR
HEALTH CARE IN THE LAST FOUR
YEARS.
THAT'S ACCORDING TO THE CENTERS
FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION.
IT SAYS THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE
STRUGGLING TO KEEP UP WITH
MEDICAL BILLS FELL BY 12 MILLION
FOR THE FIRST HALF OF THIS YEAR,
OVER 2011.
THE POOR AND THOSE NEAR THE
POVERTY LINE WERE MOST AFFECTED,
DUE LARGELY TO THE PRESIDENT'S
HEALTH CARE LAW.
>> Woodruff: AND, WALL STREET
GAVE MORE GROUND, FACED WITH
FALLING OIL PRICES AND WEAK DATA
FROM CHINA.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 162 POINTS TO CLOSE BELOW
17,570.
THE NASDAQ FELL THREE POINTS,
AND THE S&P 500 DROPPED 13.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
FEAR AND LOATHING ACROSS THE
UNITED STATES.
NEW NUMBERS ON WHO'S FIGHTING
FOR ISIS.
SUPREME COURT ARGUMENTS OVER
EQUAL REPRESENTATION, AND MUCH
MORE.
>> Ifill: IN THE WAKE OF LAST
WEEK'S SAN BERNARDINO SHOOTINGS
AND THE HARSH POLITICIZED DEBATE
THAT HAS FOLLOWED, WE, LIKE MANY
NEWS ORGANIZATIONS, HAVE BEEN
DEBATING HOW TO COVER THE STORY
OF TERRORISM AT HOME, BACKLASH
AGAINST MUSLIMS, AND HOW WE AS A
NATION COPE WITH FEAR AND
LOATHING.
WITHOUT IGNORING THE HISTORY OF
SUCH DIVISIVE RHETORIC, OR THE
DANGER IT CAN PRESENT, WE ALSO
RECOGNIZE THERE IS REAL FEAR AND
WORRY.
BUT WHERE IS THE LINE?
WE SEARCH FOR THAT ANSWER WITH
THREE PEOPLE WHO FOLLOW THESE
ISSUES.
DALIA MOGAHED IS THE DIRECTOR OF
RESEARCH AT THE INSTITUTE FOR
SOCIAL POLICY AND UNDERSTANDING.
SHE'S THE CO-AUTHOR OF THE BOOK,
"WHO SPEAKS FOR ISLAM."
RON BROWNSTEIN WRITES FOR "THE
ATLANTIC" AND "NATIONAL
JOURNAL," SPECIALIZING IN THE
DEMOGRAPHICS OF THE NATION'S
POLITICS.
AND KHALID BAYDOUN IS AN
ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF LAW AT
BARRY UNIVERSITY IN ORLANDO.
HE STUDIES THE HISTORY AND
INTERSECTION OF RACE, RELIGION
AND NATIONAL SECURITY.
THANK YOU ALL FOR JOINING US.
RON BROWNSTEIN, OVERALL, WHAT
SAN MATING THIS DISCUSSION WE
ARE -- WHAT IS ANIMATING THIS
DISCUSSION WE ARE SEEING NOW.
>> WE'RE ALREADY HAVING A REALLY
VOLATILE DEBATE ON AMERICAN
IDENTITY EVEN BEFORE PARIS AND
TWO THINGS ON NAT.
FIRST, ECONOMIC STRAIN.
IN 15 YEARS THE MEDIAN INCOME IS
LOW THAN IN 2000, A PERIOD OF
STAGNATION IS ALMOST
UNPRECEDENTED IN AMERICAN
HISTORY.
SECOND, WE ARE LIVING THROUGH
THE MOST PROFOUND DEMOGRAPHIC
CHANGE IN THE 20th CENTURY.
A MAJORITY OF OUR PUBLIC SCHOOL
SYSTEMS IS NONWHITE.
WHITE CHRISTIANS NOW FOR THE
FIRST TIME ARE LESS THAN HALF
THE TOTAL OF AMERICAN
POPULATION.
SO EVEN IN THE EARLY STAGES OF
THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN ALL OF
THESE ISSUES COME TOGETHER TO
RAISE A SERIES OF CONCERNS ABOUT
WHETHER AMERICANS AND
PARTICULARLY BLUE COLLAR WHITES,
OLDER WHITES, NON-URBAN WHITES,
MOST RELIGIOUSLY CONSERVATIVE
WHITES WERE COMFORTABLE WITH THE
CHANGES GOING ON IN THE COUNTRY,
BUT WHEN YOU ADD TO THAT THE
THREAT OF TERROR FIRST IN PARIS
AND HERE ON AMERICAN SOIL IN
SAN BERNARDINO, IT ADDS AN
ADDITIONAL ELEMENT AND THAT'S
WHAT'S PRODUCED THE COMBUSTIBLE
MIX WE'RE LIVING WITH.
>> DALIA MOGAHED, WHAT IS
LEGITIMATE IN THIS COMBUSTIBLE
POTION RON BROWNSTEIN OUTLINED
AND WHAT IS NOT?
>> WELL, I THINK ALL AMERICANS
ARE CONCERNED FOR THEIR SAFETY.
EVERYTHING FROM MASS SHOOTINGS
TO TERRORISM.
WE ARE ALL VERY CONCERNED ABOUT
VIOLENCE.
THAT IS RELAT LEGITIMATE AND WED
TO TALK ABOUT KEEPING OURSELVES
SAFE.
IS WHAT NOT LEGITIMATE AND WHAT
IS DANGEROUS IS TO BROADEN THAT
FEAR TO AN ENTIRE COMMUNITY, TO
MAKE MUSLIMS AS A COMMUNITY, AS
A GROUP COLLECTIVELY GUILTY FOR
THE CRIMES OF SPECIFIC
INDIVIDUALS.
THE REASON THAT'S DANGEROUS NOT
ONLY UNPRODUCTIVE IS THAT'S
EXACTLY WHAT I.S.I.S. WANTS US
TO DO.
THIS IS PLAYING INTO THEIR
NARRATIVE.
THEY WANT A WAR BETWEEN MUSLIMS
AND EVERYONE ELSE.
THEY ARE -- THAT FEEDS THEIR
NARRATIVE AND FEEDS THEIR
ABILITY TO RECRUIT.
>> Ifill: KHALID BAYDOUN, WE
HAVE LIVED THROUGH THIS
DEMONIZATION OF THE CHINESE, THE
JAPANESE IN THIS COUNTRY.
WE HAVE BEEN HERE BEFORE.
>> YEAH, THE CULTURE OF, YOU
KNOW, SCAPEGOATING AN ENTIRE
GROUP IS NOTHING NEW IN THE
UNITED STATES.
OBVIOUSLY WITH THE
JAPANESE-AMERICANS IN WORLD
WAR II.
THE IDEA OF THE STEREOTYPE
GUILT, THE IDEA AN INDIVIDUAL'S
RACE OR PHENO-TYPE IS SIGNALING
OR SYMBOLIC OF A NATIONAL
TERRORISM ACT IS EMBEDDED IN
SOCIETY.
ALSO EXCLUSION AXE.
THERE ARE PRECEDENTS WHERE
BANNING MUSLIMS SIGNIFIES
TRUMP'S RHETORIC IS NOTHING
NOVEL.
FIRST YOU HAD A NATURALIZATION
ACT FROM 1790 TO 1952 WHICH MADE
THE NATURALIZATION, I IS
CITIZENSHIP OF MUSLIM IMMIGRANTS
ILLEGAL BECAUSE ISLAM WAS
IRRECONCILABLE WITH WHITENESS
WHICH IS A PREREQUISITE FOR
CITIZENSHIP.
YOU HAD ACTS ON THE BOOKS TILL
1965 WHICH HAD QUOTAS FROM ASIAN
COUNTRIES AND THE INDIGENOUS
MUSLIM POPULATION, ENSLAISTLED
AFRICANS WHICH COMPRISED
1.2 MILLION PEOPLE IN THE
ANTEBELLUM ITSELF.
SO THE IDEA OF BANS MUSLIMS IS
NOTHING NOVEL AND OTHER GROUPS
BEING DEMONIZING AS WELL.
>> Ifill: RON BROWNSTEIN,
EVERY POLL I LOOK AT SHOWS
THERE'S A REASON FOR THERE TO BE
THIS KIND OF A DEMONIZATION AS
IT WERE, WHICH IS THAT THE
PARTIES SEE THINGS DIFFERENTLY.
>> I NORMSLY DIFFERENTLY.
ACROSS THE BOARD, MUSICIANS, OUR
IMMIGRANTS BROADLY SPEAKING ARE
A BURDEN AND BENEFIT TO AMERICAN
SOCIETY.
MOST AMERICANS SAY BENEFIT, A
CLEAR MAJORITY OF REPUBLICANS,
PARTICULARLY THOSE WITHOUT
COLLEGE DEGREES WILL SAY BURDEN.
IS ISLAM COMPATIBLE WITH
AMERICAN VALUES?
THERE IS SOMETHING WHERE THERE
IS ACTUALLY A MAJORITY OF
AMERICANS IN SOME POLLS, YOU
KNOW, MUCH STRONGER IN THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY WILL SAY YES.
CLEARLY ACROSS THE BOARD, IF YOU
LOOK AT THE TWO PARTIES, I THINK
THIS IS POSSIBLY THE CENTRAL
DIVIDE BETWEEN THEM.
I'VE DESCRIBED THE DEMOCRATS AS
A COALITION OF TRANSFORMATION.
THEY RELAY ON THE GROUP ORE
MILLENNIALS, MINORITIES, SOCIAL
UPSCALE WHITES WHO TEND TO BE
COMFORTABLE WITH DULL CHIEWRL
AND DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGE WE'RE
LIVING THROUGH.
THE REPUBLICANS I DESCRIBE AS
COALITION OF RESTORATION.
THEY RELY ON GROUPS WHO SHOW THE
MOST UNEASE ABOUT THE BROADER
TERMS OF AMERICAN SOCIETY, ALL
OF WHICH HAVE NOW BEEN TURBO
CHARGED BY BEING CONNECTED TO
THIS VERY LEGITIMATE ISSUE OF
SAFETY AND TERRORISM HAS REALLY
KIND OF INTENSIFIED THOSE
CONCERNS AND LARGELY EXPANDS
DONALD TRUMP'S IMPROVEMENT IN
THE POLLS IN THE LAST SEVERAL
WEEKS.
>> Ifill: DOES THAT EXPLAIN IT
TO YOU, DALIA MOGAHED, WHICH IS
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE NUMBERS AND
THE DISCONNECT AMONG DEMOCRATS,
REPUBLICANS, WHATEVER, THAT THIS
WAS BOUND TO HAPPEN?
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S
INTERESTING TO LOOK HISTORICALLY
ON WHERE THESE NUMBERS HAVE
BEEN, AND WHEN YOU LOOK AT
AMERICAN SENTIMENT ABOUT ISLAM
AND MUSLIMS, WHAT YOU FIND IS
ANTI-MUSLIM SENTIMENT SPIKES NOT
ACTUALLY AFTER TERRORIST
ATTACKS, WHICH IS WHAT I
EXPECTED TO SEE, BUT DURING
ELECTION CYCLES AND IN THE RUNUP
TO THE IRAQ WAR.
SO ANTI-MUSLIM SENTIMENT IS A
POLITICAL TOOL USED PRIMARILY BY
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY TO DRUM UP
VOTES, AND I THINK THAT'S
DETRIMENTAL TO OUR DEMOCRACY,
NOT ONLY DANGEROUS FOR MUSLIMS.
>> Ifill: YOU'RE SAYING THIS
SENTIMENT DOES NOT EXIST AT ALL
ABSENT AN ELECTION?
>> IT, OF COURSE, EXISTS BUT I'M
LOOKING AT WHEN IT SPIKES.
SO WHEN YOU LOOK AT ANTI-MUSLIM
SENTIMENT, IT ACTUALLY DID NOT
INCREASE AFTER 9/11.
BEFORE AND AFTER 9/11, THERE WAS
VIRTUALLY NO CHANGE AND A SLIGHT
IMPROVEMENT WHEN YOU LOOK BEFORE
AND AFTER THE BOSTON BOMBING,
AGAIN, NO CHANGE.
BUT YOU HAVE A 15-POINT SPIKE
AMONG R&PUBLICANS DURING
ELECTION CYCLES.
THAT SIGNALS TO ME THAT WHAT IS
DRIVING ANTI-ISLAM SENTIMENT, AN
INCREASE IN ANTI-MUSLIM
SENTIMENT IS A POLITICAL
CAMPAIGN IS A MANUFACTURED
EFFORT TO CREATE FEAR AND TURN
FEAR INTO VOTES.
THE PROBLEM, THOUGH, IS THAT WE
ALL LOSE WHEN THIS HAPPENS.
FIRST OF ALL, IN ALL CASES, IT
DIDN'T WORK.
THAT STRATEGY SIMPLY DID NOT
WORK.
THE MOST ISLA ISLAMPHOBIC REPUBN
CANDIDATES DID NOT WIN THIS
PRIMARY.
WE ALL LOST BECAUSE ANTI-MUSLIM
SENTIMENT AND FEAR HURTS OUR
FREEDOM.
IT MAKES US LESS CRITICAL, IT
MAKES US LESS LIKELY TO HOLD OUR
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABLE, IT MAKES
US MORE ACCEPTING OF
AUTHORITARIANISM, CONFORMITY AND
PREJUDICE AND THIS IS CORROSIVE
TO OUR DEMOCRACY.
KHALID BAYDOUN, IS THERE A
DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN HATE
SPEECH AND FEAR SPEECH IN THIS
CONTEXT.
>> THEY EMANATE FROM ONE ANOTHER
AND I THINK WE TEND TO FOCUS ON
ISLAMPHOBIA, NOT THE ROOT CAUSE
WHICH IS IGNORANCE AND
MISREPRESENTATION OF ISLAMS AND
MUSLIMS, IF WE CAN ERODE THOSE
TWO THINGS, ISLAMPHOBIA WILL NOT
SPEAK IN TIMES OF CRISIS.
THERE IS PERVASIVE IGNORANCE OF
THE CON TIEWRS OF MUSLIM
IDENTITY ON BOTH SIDES OF PARTY
LINES.
ISLAM FOR ONE IS ALWAYS FRAMED
AS AN IMMIGRANT FAITH AND
FOREIGN FAITH YET THE PLURALITY
OF MUSLIMS ARE BLACK, ONE-THI.
SO IF WE WANT TO GET AT THE
HEART OF CURBING ISLAMPHOBIA,
THE REAL STRATEGY IS RETRENCH
THE IGNORANCE, RETRENCH THE
REPRESENTATIONS OF MUSLIMS AND
ISLAM WHICH FEEDS HATE SPEECH.
>> Ifill: LACKING THE
POLITICAL CLOUT OTHER GROUPS
HAVE, RON, WHAT IS THE REALITY
AND THE ABILITY FOR THAT TO
HAPPEN?
>> AS I SAID, I THINK WE'RE
HAVING A DIFFICULT ENOUGH TIME
DEALING WITH THE CHANGING FACE
OF AMERICA WHEN WE WERE THINKING
ABOUT THE CULTURALLIS IMPLICATI,
THE DEMOGRAPHIC AND ECONOMIC
COMPLICATIONS.
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT THE
ECONOMIC STREAM OF THE VOTERS.
YOU ADD TO THAT THE TERRORIST
AND THE SAFETY ISSUE AND THE
THING BECOMES VASTLY MORE
COMBUSTIBLE.
THE PRESIDENT HAD A TWOFOLD
MESSAGE.
HE SAID, ON THE ONE HAND, WE
HAVE TO COMBAT BROAD-BRUSH
PAINTING OF ANY GROUP, BUT HE
ALSO SAID THERE IS A
RESPONSIBILITY IN THE
MUSLIM-AMERICAN COMMUNITY TO BE
VIGILANT AND DEDICATED AND
FORCEFUL IN ROOTING OUT THE KIND
OF BEHAVIOR THAT WE SAW -- THE
KIND OF ATTITUDES WE SAW IN THE
ATTACK IN SAN BERNARDINO.
AND THAT I THINK IS IMPORTANT
FOR EVERYBODY TO RECOGNIZE HOW
VOLATILE THE SITUATION IS
BECAUSE IT'S SO DIFFICULT EVEN
BEFORE THIS.
AFTER THIS, IT'S THAT MUCH MORE
EXPLOSIVE.
>> Ifill: A LOT OF REPUBLICANS
AGREE WITH THE PRESIDENT ABOUT
THE VIGILANCE ISSUE.
RON BROWNSTEIN OF THE NATIONAL
JOURNAL AND "THE ATLANTIC,"
DALIA MOGAHED, KHALID BAYDOUN,
THANK YOU ALL VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AS LAW ENFORCEMENT
AND INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS WORRY
ABOUT ATTACKS INSIDE THE UNITED
STATES INSPIRED BY THE ISLAMIC
STATE GROUP, A NEW REPORT
RELEASED TODAY SAYS THE NUMBER
OF FOREIGN FIGHTERS TRAVELING TO
IRAQ AND SYRIA HAS DRAMATICALLY
INCREASED OVER THE PAST YEAR.
THIS CHART SHOWS MOST OF THE NEW
FIGHTERS ARE FROM THE MIDDLE
EAST, THE FORMER SOVIET
REPUBLICS AND WESTERN EUROPE.
THE AVERAGE RATE OF FIGHTERS
THEN RETURNING TO WESTERN EUROPE
IS ESTIMATED TO BE 20 TO 30%.
WE TURN NOW TO THE LEAD AUTHOR
OF THE REPORT, RICHARD BARRETT,
SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT OF THE ALI
SOUFAN GROUP, A SECURITY
CONSULTING COMPANY.
HE'S ALSO A FORMER BRITISH
DIPLOMAT AND INTELLIGENCE
OFFICER.
AND NEW YORK TIMES REPORTER
RUKMINI CALLIMACHI.
SHE'S WRITTEN EXTENSIVELY ABOUT
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP AND ITS
FOLLOWERS.
RICHARD BARRETT, RUKMINI
CALLIMACHI.
THE NUMBER OF FIGHTERS GOING
INTO SYRIA AND IRAQ, INCREASING
DRAMATICALLY IN THE LAST 18
MONTHS.
HOW MUCH HAS IT GONE UP, WHO ARE
THEY AND WHERE ARE THEY COMING
FROM?
>> I RECKON IT'S DOUBLED.
IT'S GONE FROM 12,000 IN JUNE OF
LAST YEAR TO BETWEEN 27,000 AND
31,000 NOW.
MOST OF THE RECRUITS ARE FROM
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH
AFRICA, BUT CONSIDER THE NUMBER
FROM OTHER COUNTRIES AS WELL,
MOST NONOTABLY EUROPE, RUSSIA AD
THE FORMER REPUBLICANS OF THE
SOVIET UNION.
I THINK ONE THING THAT'S
INTERESTING IS FROM NORTH
AMERICA, THE NUMBER HAS REMAINED
PRETTY FLAT, AIR RATHER
UNREMARKABLE INCREASE FROM NORTH
AMERICA WHICH IS QUITE AN
ILLUSTRATION OF YOUR DISCUSSION
EARLIER IN THE PROGRAM.
BUT THERE ARE MANY REASONS WHY
PEOPLE JOIN THE ISLAMIC STATE,
AND IT DOESN'T MEAN ALL ARE
DOMESTIC TERRORISTS IN TRAINING.
A LOT WILL GO TO JOIN THE
ISLAMIC STATE.
I THINK THE KEY QUESTION IS
ABOUT THE RETURNEES, WHETHER
THEY HAVE SOME INTENTION TO DO
SOMETHING LIKE THE PARIS ATTACKS
OR WHETHER, IN FACT, THEY'RE
JUST FED UP AND COMPLETELY
DISILLUSIONED BY THE ISLAMIC
STATE AND WANT TO GO HOME.
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO ASK YOU
ABOUT THE RETURNEES, BUT BACK TO
THE ORIGIN OF THEIR DECISION TO
MAKE THIS MOVE, WHAT IS DRIVING
MOST OF THEM?
>> WELL, IT'S HARD TO SAY, OF
COURSE, AND WE NEED TO KNOW
MORE, BUT I THINK THAT THE
ISLAMIC STATE DOES OFFER SOME
REAL ATTRACTIONS.
IT OFFERS, OBVIOUSLY, SOME SORT
OF ADVENTURE.
IT'S A NEW ADVENTURE AS WELL.
YOU CAN BE IN ON SOMETHING THAT
LOOKS VERY IMPORTANT FROM THE
BEGINNING.
YOU CAN BE IN ON SOMETHING THAT
GIVES YOU A SENSE OF PURPOSE,
BELONGING, A SENSE OF DIRECTION
WH M COMPLETELY LACKING
IN YOUR LIFE AT HOME.
I THINK, ALSO, IT SORT OF
FORGIVES THE PAST SO YOU CAN
SHED ALL YOUR PAST AND YOU CAN
START AFRESH AS A VALUED AND
RESPECTED MEMBER OF SOCIETY.
I THINK FOR MANY PEOPLE WHO GO
TO JOIN THE ISLAMIC STATE, THAT
THEY FOUND LACKING, THAT THEY
FOUND DIFFICULT.
>> Woodruff: RUKMINI
CALLIMACHI, YOU'VE DONE SO MUCH
REPORTING ON THIS PHENOMENON.
WHAT WOULD YOU ADD TO THE WHY
THIS IS HAPPENING?
>> WELL, I THINK VERY BROADLY
SPEAKING, THE YOUNG PEOPLE I
HAVE SPOKEN TO THAT HAVE
ATTEMPTED OR SUCCEEDED IN MAKING
THE JOURNEY SEEMING TO BE COMING
FROM A PLACE OVEREMPTINESS IN
THEIR LIVES BACK IN THE U.S.
I'M DEFERGHT SPECIFICALLY TO ONE
WOMAN I SPENT A LOT OF TIME WITH
IN WASHINGTON STATE WHO WAS
RECRUITED BY A MAN WHO WE
BELIEVE WAS LOOKING FOR THE
ISLAMIC STATE BUT DID NOT END UH
HER GRANDMOTHER, EARLY 20s,
DIDN'T HAVE A FULL-TIME JOB WHEN
I SAW HER.
HER IDEA OF FUN, SHE TOLD ME,
WAS GOING TO THE MALL AND
WALKING AROUND THE MALL AND
LOOKING AT THE SHOPS AND GRADING
AT MERCHANDISE SHE COULD NOT
AFFORD TO PURCHASE.
SO YOU CAN SEE FROM THAT PLACE
TO THEN BEING SEEN AS, YOU KNOW,
THE WIFE OF A FUTURE JIHADIST,
THAT THAT COULD BE EXCITING AND
GIVE YOU TRUE MEANING IN A LIFE
THAT ISN'T FILLED WITH THAT.
>> Woodruff: YOU'RE
EXPERIENCING WHAT YOU'RE SEEING
IN YOUR REPORTING IS THESE ARE
YOUNG PEOPLE WHO LACK SOMETHING
IN THEIR LIVES WRATH THAN YOUNG
PEOPLE WHO ARE EXCITED BY
SOMETHING THEY SEE ONLINE, SOME
OF THE PROPAGANDA THAT THE
ISLAMIC STATE IS PUTTING OUT
THERE?
>> I THINK THE FIRST PRECEDES
THE SECOND.
I THINK, AT LEAST IN THE ONES
I'VE SPOKEN TO, THERE IS A PLACE
OF EMPTINESS, AND THEN THIS
PROPAGANDA SEEKS THEM AND IT'S
EXTREMELY SLICK AND CONVINCING.
IN THE CASE OF THIS WOMAN, SHE
WAS EXTREMELY INTERESTING
BECAUSE SHE WAS NOT JUST A
PERSON WHO HAD NO FAITH AND NOT
A MUSLIM CONVERT.
SHE WAS ACTUALLY A SUNDAY SCHOOL
TEACHER.
SHE WAS A VERY ARDENT CHRISTIAN
AND THEY MANAGED TO TAKE HER
FROM THAT PLACE TO CONVERTING TO
ISLAM ONLINE, IN PRIVATE,
WITHOUT ANY OTHER MUSLIMS
PRESENT, TO GO FROM THERE
QUICKLY ON TO DISCUSSING
POTENTIAL MARRIAGE TO A GOOD
MUSLIM AND DISCUSSING HER VOYAGE
TO WHAT THEY DESCRIBED AS A
MUSLIM LAND, WHICH SHE
UNDERSTOOD TO BE SYRIA.
AND, SO, IT WAS VERY SWIFT.
>> Woodruff: RICHARD BARRETT,
ON THE QUESTION OF WHO COMES
BACK TO THEIR COUNTRYOR
AND WHY THEY DO IT, WHETHER THEY
GO BACK TO COMMIT AN ATTACK OR
GO BACK DISILLUSIONED, WHAT DID
YOU PLERN ABOUT THAT AND HOW
THAT'S CHANGING?
>> THEY'RE TRYING TO DO A
SYSTEMATIC SURVEY OF THE
RETURNEES TO ASK THEM WHY DID
YOU GO AND COME BACK?
IT'S BEEN DIFFICULT BECAUSE
PEOPLE AREN'T GENERALLY KEEN ON
TALKING ABOUT THAT.
IF THEY COME BACK AND JUST WANT
TO GET ON WITH THEIR LIVES, THEY
DON'T WANT TO BE REMIND OF THE
EXPERIENCE IN THE ISLAMIC STATE.
AND OTHERS WHO COME BACK WITH
PERHAPS MORE UNCERTAIN MOTIVE,
THEY WOULDN'T WANT TO TALK TO US
EITHER.
RESEARCH THAT.
AS FAR AS ONE CAN TELL, I THINK
MANY r i AS RUKMINI CALLIMACHI,E
HAVE A VERY EMOTIONAL RESPONSE
TO THE ISLAMIC STATE.
WHEN THEY GET THERE, THEY FIND
OUT IT'S NOT LIKE THAT AT ALL
AND THAIIVED DUPED BY THEIR MIND
AND THE PROPAGANDA.
TAS ARTICLE IN THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" ILLUSTRATED, THE ISLAMIC
STATE IS VERY PERSISTENT IN
PURSUING THESE POSSIBLE WEAK
CHARACTERS THEY WANT TO DRAW IN.
>> Woodruff: SO, RUKMINI, ARE
WE LEARNING WHAT THE UNITED
STATES AND OTHER COUNTRIES
SHOULD BE DOING TO SLOW THIS
DOWN, IF NOT STOP IT, AT LEAST
CUT DOWN ON THE NUMBER WHO ARE
ATTRACTED?
>> I THINK THE UNITED STATES
SEEMS TO BE DOING SOMETHING
RIGHT BECAUSE AS RICHARD POINTED
OUT, THE NUMBERS FROM AMERICA
ARE FLAT, WHEREAS THEY'RE
SPIKING IN NUMEROUS OTHER
THEATERS, SPECIFICALLY IN
EUROPE.
SO THERE IS SOMETHING THAT IS
WORKING.
WHAT I WOULD ADD IS, IN THE CASE
OF THE YOUNG WOMAN I WAS
PROFILING, SHE MANAGED TO PULL
HERSELF BACK FROM THE EDGE OF
THE CLIFF, AND SHE DID IT
THROUGH THE HELP OF THE FORMER
EXTREMISTS WHO ARE NOW BACK IN
THE WEST AND WHO SAW THE ERRORS
OF THEIR WAYS AND ARE NOW ONLINE
THEMSELVES TRYING TO FISH OUT
PEOPLE LIKE THIS YOUNG WOMAN WHO
IS ABOUT TO POSSIBLY MAKE, YOU
KNOW, A VERY TERRIBLE ERROR.
WHAT I THINK IS LACKING IS THAT
THERE ISN'T REALLY A FORMER LIFE
PLACE IN AMERICA FOR THOSE
PEOPLE.
IF YOU ARE SOMEBODY LIKE A MAN
WHO TRIED TO GO TO PAKISTAN AND
MET THE TALIBAN YEARS AND YEARS
AGO BUT NOW HAS COME BACK AND IS
A LAW-ABIDING CITIZEN AND IS
HELPING DERADICALLIZING THOSE
PEOPLE, SEEMS THERE SHOULD BE A
PLACE FOR THOSE VOICES BECAUSE
THEY'RE VERY POWERFUL.
THEY CAN SPEAK TO THE IDEOLOGY.
HE COULD SAY, I HAVE BEEN THERE
AND KNOW THE VERSES YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT.
LET ME SHOW YOU VERSES THAT SAY
THE OPPOSITE.
>> Woodruff: RICHARD BARRETT
AND RUKMINI CALLIMACHI.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: STAY WITH US, COMING
UP ON THE NEWSHOUR:
DEVELOPERS CASH IN ON A LITTLE
KNOWN VISA PROGRAM.
HOW COMMON CORE STANDARDS AFFECT
TEST SCORES.
PLUS-- CONSPIRACY, MYSTERY AND
THE SUPERNATURAL.
AUTHOR STACY SCHIFF'S TRUE STORY
OF THE SALEM WITCH TRIALS.
BUT FIRST, TO THE SUPREME COURT,
WHERE JUSTICES TODAY HEARD ONE
OF THE MOST IMPORTANT CASES OF
THIS TERM-- INVOLVING THE VERY
NUTS AND BOLTS OF HOW OUR
DEMOCRACY WORKS.
AT ISSUE: WHO GETS COUNTED WHEN
STATES HAVE TO DIVVY UP THEIR
TERRITORY INTO STATE-HOUSE AND
STATE-SENATE DISTRICTS.
EVERYONE WHO LIVES THERE?
OR JUST THOSE WHO CAN VOTE?
MARCIA COYLE OF THE "NATIONAL
LAW JOURNAL" WAS IN THE
COURTROOM TODAY, AND SHE'S HERE
NOW TO TELL US MORE.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT EQUAL
REPRESENTATION.
WE ALWAYS ASSUME SOMEHOW ONE
MAN, ONE WOMAN, ONE VOTE IS THE
RULE.
HOW DID THIS GET TO THE COURT?
>> WELL, AS JUSTICE BREYER
POINTED OUT IN THE ARGUMENTS
TODAY, THIS CASE RAISES THE
FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION OF WHAT
KIND OF DEMOCRACY DO WE WANT?
DO WE WANT A DEMOCRACY IN WHICH
EVERYONE HERE IS REPRESENTED OR
A DEMOCRACY IN WHICH ONLY THOSE
WHO HAVE THE RIGHT TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE DEMOCRATIC
PROCESS THROUGH THE VOTE ARE
REPRESENTED?
THE EQUAL PROTECTION CLAUSE OF
THE 14th AMENDMENT THE COURT
HELD INCLUDES THE PRINCIPLE ONE
PERSON, ONE VOTE.
THAT PRINCIPLE, THE COURT SAID,
REQUIRES STATES TO DRAW
LEGISLATIVE DISTRICTS OF
SUBSTANTIALLY EQUAL POPULATION,
BUT THE COURT HAS NEVER SAID --
AND THIS PRINCIPLE GOES BACK TO
THE 1960s -- THE COURT HAS
NEVER SAID WHAT POPULATION
COUNTS.
THE CASE THAT THE COURT HEARD
TODAY TAKES ISSUE WITH WHAT ALL
50 STATES HAVE BEEN DOING FOR
BASICALLY HALF A CENTURY, USING
TOTAL POPULATION.
THE TWO TEXAS VOTERS WHO BROUGHT
THE CHALLENGE TO THE SUPREME
COURT CLAIM THAT ONE PERSON, ONE
VOTE REALLY REQUIRES STATES TO
DRAW DISTRICTS ON THE BASIS OF
THE ELIGIBILITY OF VOTERS, THE
VOTING POPULATION, THE ELIGIBLE
VOTING POPULATION.
>> WoodruffPOPULATION.
>> Ifill: IF YOU'RE SOMEBODY
WHO DOESN'T LIKE TO VOTE OR A
CHILD UNDER AGE 18 WHO IS NOT
QUALIFIED TO VOTE, YOU'RE
COUNTED FOR THE REPRESENTATIONAL
PURPOSES?
>> THAT IS CORRECT, UNDER TOTAL
POPULATION, YOU ARE COUNTED.
TODAY THE JUSTICES EXAMINED BOTH
THE THEORY, THE MEANING OF ONE
PERSON, ONE VOTE AS WELL AS THE
PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES OF A
SHIFT FROM WHAT THE STATES HAVE
BEEN DOING FOR HALF A CENTURY TO
JUST USING VOTER ELIGIBLE
POPULATION.
>> Ifill: WHAT ARE THE
PRACTICAL CONSEQUENCES?
WHO'S AFFECTED?
>> THAT IS A QUESTION JUSTICE
BREYER ASKED DURING THE END OF
THE ARGUMENTS.
HE SAID WHO'S LEFT OUT,
BASICALLY?
THE LAWYER, THE VOTERS WHO ARE
CHALLENGING THIS SAID, CHILDREN,
NONCITIZENS WHO ARE HERE
LEGALLY, UNDOCUMENTED ALIENS AND
DISENFRANCHISED FELONS.
BUT HE ALSO TOLD JUSTICE BREYER,
IF THIS IS A CONCERN, THE STATE
CAN ADDRESS IT BY GIVING THEM
THE RIGHT TO VOTE.
ON THE CONSTITUTIONAL SIDE --
>> AND GIVING CHILDREN THE RIGHT
TO VOTE?
>> ALL THOSE WHO ARE LEFT OUT
THE RIGHT TO VOTE.
SO MANY JUSTICES EXPLORE MORE
DEEPLY THE MEANING OF ONE PERSON
ONE VOTE.
JUSTICE SOCIET SOTO SOTOMAYOR SO
ONLY WITH ELIGIBLE POPULATION
YOU ARE IGNORING THE DUAL
INTERESTS UNDER THIS PRINCIPLE.
IT'S NOT ONLY THE VOTER
INTERESTS, IT'S THE
REPRESENTATIONAL INTERESTS, AND
WE'VE GIVEN STATES THE
DISCRETION TO MAKE THIS JOYCE.
JUSTICE CAG KAGAN SAID I THINK E
FRAMERS OF THE 14th AMENDMENT
ADDRESSED THIS.
THE SPONSOR OF THE AMENDMENT
SAID NUMBERS NOT VOTERS, NUMBERS
NOT PROPERTY, THAT IS THE THEORY
OF THE CONSTITUTION.
SHE SAID SHE COULDN'T WRAP HER
MIND AROUND THE OTHER ARGUMENT
WHEN SHE FELT THAT THE FRAMERS
ADDRESSED IT.
SHE ALSO NOTED AT ONE POINT THAT
THE CONSTITUTION EXPLICITLY SAYS
YOU USE TOTAL POPULATION WHEN
YOU APPORTION THE U.S. HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
>> Ifill: RIGHT.
SO WHY WOULD THE CONSTITUTION
REQUIRE TOTAL POPULATION FOR
THAT BUT FORBID IT FOR USE OF
STATE LEGISLATIVE REDISTRICTING?
>> Ifill: SO IF YOU ARE -- THE
CIVIL RIGHTS GROUPS SAID THIS IS
A CIVIL RIGHTS ISSUE.
>> YES.
>> Ifill: IS THAT HOW IT BROKE
DOWN IN THE COURT ARGUMENTS
TODAY?
>> IT WASN'T MUCH ABOUT THE
POLITICS.
THIS CASE IS AT THE INTERSECTION
OF THE CONSTITUTION AND
POLITICS, BUT IT'S VERY CLEAR,
AND EVERYONE ON BOTH SIDES
PRETTY MUCH AGREE THAT IF YOU
USE VOTER ELIGIBLE POPULATION TO
DRAW YOUR DISTRICTS, YOU'RE
GOING TO SEE A SHIFT FROM -- YOU
WILL SEE SEATS MOVING FROM THE
URBAN AREAS WHERE YOU HAVE
GREATER POPULATION THAT TEND TO
VOTE DEMOCRATIC TO LESS
POPULATED RURAL AREAS THAT TEND
TO VOTE REPUBLICAN.
SO THAT'S THE POLITICS END OF
IT.
ALSO, AT LEAST IN TEXAS AND A
FEW OTHER STATES, THE POPULATION
THAT WOULD PROBABLY FEEL THE
IMPACT OF THIS MOST NEGATIVELY
WOULD BE YOUR LATINO POPULATION
WHICH IS CLOSER TO THE CITIES
AND HAS LARGER FAMILIES WITH
MORE CHILDREN.
>> Ifill: I'M ALWAYS CURIOUS
HOW THE CASES THAT WE THINK ARE
SETTLED END UP AT THE COURT.
HOW DID THIS ONE DO THIS?
>> IT'S INTERESTING.
THERE ARE TWO VOTE HORSE BROUGHT
THE CHALLENGE, BUT BEHIND THE
TWO VOTERS IS REALLY ONE MAN,
EDWARD BLUM, WHO RUNS THE
PROJECT ON FAIR REPRESENTATION
WHOSE GOAL IS TONED ABOUT ALL
RACIAL AND ETHNIC
CLASSIFICATIONS.
HE IS BEHIND THE CASE WE MAY
DISCUSS TOMORROW ON AFFIRMATIVE
ACTION IN UNIVERSITIES.
>> YOU'VE SEEN HIM BEFORE AND
WILL SEE HIM AGAIN.
>> YES.
MARCIA COYLE, "NATIONAL LAW
JOURNAL."
THANK YOU.
>> MY PLEASURE, GWEN.
>> Woodruff: MUCH ATTENTION ON
CAPITOL HILL IS FOCUSED ON A
DEADLINE THIS WEEK TO PASS A
MAJOR FUNDING BILL FOR THE
GOVERNMENT.
BUT AS IS OFTEN THE CASE, OTHER
LESS-NOTICED BILLS GET SWEPT UP
IN THE PROCESS.
TONIGHT WE HAVE A REPORT ABOUT
ONE OF THOSE-- A CONTROVERSIAL
IMMIGRATION PROGRAM TIED TO
JOBS, DEVELOPMENT AND MONEY
THAT'S DUE TO EXPIRE FRIDAY.
IT'S BEEN AROUND FOR TWO
DECADES, BUT IS UP FOR RENEWAL
AND POSSIBLY SOME CHANGES.
ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT PAUL
SOLMAN HAS THE FIRST OF TWO
REPORTS THIS WEEK, PART OF OUR
SERIES "MAKING SENSE" OF
FINANCIAL NEWS.
>> Reporter: OFFICIALLY, THIS IS
AN ECONOMICALLY DEPRESSED PART
OF BROOKLYN, NEW YORK.
SO WHERE ARE WE?
>> WE'RE RIGHT HERE AT NORTHERN
163.
AND THE BARCLAYS CENTER IS RIGHT
OVER THERE.
>> Reporter: FOR YEARS,
FREELANCE JOURNALIST NORM ODER
HAS BEEN FOLLOWING THIS PROJECT;
FORMERLY CALLED ATLANTIC YARDS,
NOW PACIFIC PARK-- IS WRITING A
BOOK ABOUT IT.
>> WHAT'S BEING BUILT IS THE
SHADED AREA.
>> Reporter: WHAT'S BEING BUILT
IS CONDOMINIUM HOUSING.
THE INVESTORS: FOREIGNERS,
MOSTLY CHINESE, WHO, AS PART OF
OUR COUNTRY'S E.B.-FIVE VISA
PROGRAM, CAN GET PERMANENT U.S.
RESIDENT VISAS-- GREEN CARDS--
FOR THEMSELVES, SPOUSE AND MINOR
CHILDREN, IN RETURN FOR THEIR
INVESTMENT.
THE CHUNK OF CHANGE REQUIRED?
>> E.B.-FIVE INVESTMENTS ARE
SUPPOSED TO BE A MILLION DOLLARS
UNLESS IT'S IN A RURAL AREA OR
IN AN AREA OF HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT.
THAT'S CALLED A TARGETED
EMPLOYMENT AREA, THEN IT'S $500
THOUSAND.
GUESS WHAT?
EVERY PROJECT IS FINAGLED INTO "
HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT AREA."
LOOK AROUND HERE-- WE'RE IN A
PROSPEROUS AREA.
A BROWNSTONE OVER HERE IS EASILY
OVER $2 MILLION; CONDOS IN SOME
OF THESE BUILDINGS, CLOSE TO A
MILLION.
HOW DO YOU GET TO BE A TARGETED
EMPLOYMENT AREA?
YOU HAVE TO CREATE A ZONE OF
HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT.
SO HOW DO YOU DO THAT?
>> YOU HAVE TO CONNECT CENSUS
TRACTS SO IT ADDS UP, IN TOTAL,
TO BE 150 OF THE OVERALL
NATIONAL UNEMPLOYMENT AVERAGE,
SO THIS IS WHAT THEY DID.
THIS IS TAKING YOU OUT HERE IN
THIS ARC THROUGH THE
NEIGHBORHOOD OF CROWN HEIGHTS,
AND INTO THIS NEIGHBORHOOD
BEDFORD-STUYVESANT, ALL THE WAY
UP INTO THIS POOR DISTRICT,
CREATING THIS RATHER ODD SHAPE.
I CALL IT THE "BED-STY
BOOMERANG."
>> Reporter: ODER MEANS THAT TH"
TARGETED EMPLOYMENT AREA" IS A
CONTORTED TRACT DRAWN TO MEET
THE HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT HURDLE FOR
THE LOWER HALF-MILLION-DOLLAR
INVESTMENT- WHICH MUST CREATE
TEN JOBS AS A CONDITION FOR THE
VISAS.
>> THERE'S SOMETHING REALLY FAKE
GOING ON.
>> Reporter: NEVERTHELESS, IT'S
PERFECTLY LEGAL UNDER CURRENT
E.B.-FIVE LEGISLATION.
FOREST CITY RATNER, THE
DEVELOPER OF PACIFIC PARK, SAYS
IT "COMPLIED WITH ALL OF THE
REQUIRED GUIDELINES AND LAWS.
WE HAVE CREATED THOUSANDS OF
CONSTRUCTION AND PERMANENT JOBS
IN AN AREA WITH HISTORICALLY
VERY HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT LEVELS
70% OF THE DEVELOPMENT COMPANY
IS OWNED BY A FIRM BASED IN
SHANGHAI, SO CHINESE INVESTORS
ARE GETTING GREEN CARDS FOR
BUILDING LUXURY HOUSING IN A
RITZY NEIGHBORHOOD, AND THE BULK
OF THE PROFITS WILL GO TO CHINA.
NOT SURPRISINGLY, IT ISN'T JUST
CRUSADING REPORTERS WHO FIND
E.B.-FIVE PROJECTS LIKE THIS ONE
PROBLEMATIC.
>> MUCH OF THE INVESTMENT MONEY
COMING INTO TARGETED EMPLOYMENT
AREAS HAS BEEN DIRECTED TOWARDS
LAVISH-- I MEAN, BUILDING
PROJECTS IN WELL-TO-DO URBAN
AREAS.
ONE OF THE MOST NOTORIOUS
EXAMPLES OF THIS GERRYMANDERING
TO PUSH THE BOUNDARIES IS THE
HUDSON YARDS PROJECT.
>> Reporter: REPUBLICAN SENATOR
HARLCES GRASSLEY IS TALKING
ABOUT THIS E.B.-FIVE PROJECT IN
MANHATTAN, WHICH PERSUADED
FOREIGN INVESTORS TO BUILD
LUXURY APARTMENT BUILDINGS,
OFFICE TOWERS AND RETAIL SPACE
RIGHT NEXT TO THE HIP HIGHLINE
AND CHELSEA NEIGHBORHPLHRLDE LO
DELINEATED A SKINNY TRACT THAT
STRETCHED 10 MILES NORTH, TO
INCLUDE THE POOR, DENSELY
POPULATED MANHATTANVILLE HOUSING
PROJECT."
RELATED COMPANIES," THE
DEVELOPER OF HUDSON YARDS, DID
NOT RESPOND TO PBS NEWHOUR'S
REQUESTS FOR COMMENT.
>> EVEN THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," WHICH NEVER MET A
BUSINESS PROJECT IT DIDN'T LIKE,
REPORTED ON HOW THIS PROGRAM HAS
BEEN ABUSED.
>> Reporter: CASE IN POINT: A
CHICAGO DEVELOPER WHO SUCKERED
SEVERAL HUNDRED CHINESE INTO
INVESTING $160 MILLION IN A
PROPOSED HOTEL AND CONVENTION
CENTER NEAR O'HARE AIRPORT.
A SLICK, CHINESE LANGUAGE
PROMOTIONAL VIDEO, USING
ILLINOIS OFFICIALS AND THE STATE
SEAL, HELPED CONVINCE INVESTORS
THIS WAS LEGIT.
>> WE WELCOME E.B.-FIVE
INVESTORS TO THE STATE OF
ILLINOIS AND THE CITY OF
CCAGOHI.
>> Reporter: BUT NOTHING WAS
BUILT, NO VISAS ISSUED, THE
MONEY SIPHONED INSTEAD FOR
PERSONAL USE AND TO FUND A
COSMETIC SURGERY BUSINESS.
THE DEVELOPER WAS CHARGED WITH
FRAUD.
MOREOVER, THE JOB CREATION
CLAIMS ARE SUSPT, SECAYS
BROOKINGS RESEARCHER AUDREY
SINGER:
>> THERE'S VERY LTLE ITKNOWLEDGE
OF WHO GETS THOSE JOBS, WHERE
THEY LIVE, WHETHER THEY'RE GOOD
JOBS, WHETHER THEY'RE SHORT TERM
OR LONG TERM JOBS.
>> Reporter: AND YET THE
E.B.-FIVE PROGRAM IS BOOMING,
ESPECIALLY SINCE THE CRASH OF
2008, WHEN TRADITIONAL BANK
FINANCING FOR REAL ESTATE
DEVELOPMENT DRIED UP.
THE NUMBER OF FOREIGN INVESTORS
WHO WERE ALLOCATED VISAS UNDER
THE REGIONAL CENTER PROGRAM HAS
JUMPED FROM 805 IN 2007 TO THE
ANNUAL LIMIT OF 10,000 THE PAST
TWO YEARS, A LIMIT ALREADY
REACHED THIS YEAR BY SEPTEMBER.
90% OF THOSE NOW APPLYING ARE
CHINESE.
SO WHY SHOULDN'T E.B.-FIVE BE
REINED IN, OR SIMPLY SCUTTLED,
WHEN ITS AUTHORIZATION RUNS OUT
THIS MONTH?
IMMIGRATION PROFESSOR STEPHEN
YALE-LOEHR HELPED STRUCTURE THE
PROJECT IN BROOKLYN WHERE THIS
PIECE BEGAN.
>> THE PROGRAM IS GOOD IN A
VARIETY OF WAYS.
IT CREATES JOBS FOR U.S. WORKERS
AT NO EXPENSE TO THE U.S.
TAXPAYER, PARTICULARLY DURING
THE GREAT RECESSION WHEN
DEVELOPERS COULD NOT FIND
DOMESTIC CAPITAL TO START OR
FINISH THEIR PROJECTS.
E.B.-FIVE MONEY BECAME ONE WAY
THAT THEY COULD DO SO.
>> MY PASSION WAS IN
REDEVELOPING NEIGHBORHOODS AND
THEN I FOUND E.B.-FIVE, WHICH IS
ANOTHER TOOL TO DO IT.
>> Reporter: ANGEL BRUNNER IS
THE CO-FOUNDER OF E.B.-FIVE
CAPITAL, A PRIVATE FIRM THAT
RECRUITS INVESTORS THROUGH SO-
CALLED "REGIONAL CENTERS" AND
POOLS FOREIGN CAPITAL FOR
DEVELOPERS.
>> WHAT I REALLY LIKED ABOUT IT
WAS THAT IT DIDN'T TAKE TAXPAYER
MONEY, AND IT WAS A FOREIGN
SOURCE OF CAPITAL.
>> Reporter: A CHEAP SOURCE, AS
INVESTORS SETTLE FOR LOW RETURNS
IN EXCHANGE FOR GREEN CARDS AND
EVENTUAL CITIZENSHIP.
NOT ALL E.B.-FIVE PROJECTS ARE
SUSPECT.
THE SAME REGIONAL CENTER THAT
HELPED FINANCE THE PACIFIC PARK
PROJECT IN BROOKLYN ALSO HELPED
PUT WI-FI IN THE NEW YORK CITY
SUBWAYS.
ANOTHER EXAMPLE: JUST A STONE'S
THROW FROM THE NATION'S CAPITOL
BUILDING, A FAMOUS SPACE THAT'S
GONE TO SEED IS GETTING A MUCH
NEEDED FACELIFT:
>> IT'S THE ORIGINAL SITE OF THE
BEATLES FIRST NORTH AMERIANC
CONCERT IN THE 1960'S.
IT'S GONE FROM PARKING LOT TO
WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY AND
NOW FINALLY TO CLASS A RETAIL
AND CLASS A OFFICE.
>> Reporter: BUT ONLY BECAUSE OF
E.B.-FIVE.
SO, FOR THIS PROGRAM, AS FOR SO
MANY OTHERS, THERE'S THE GOOD
ALONG WITH THE BAD.
AND REMEMBER THE INVESTORS, SAYS
STEPHEN YALE-LOEHR:
>> IT'S NOT JUST $500,000
THEY'RE BRINGING TO THE UNITED
STATES-- THEY'RE BUYING HOMES
HERE, THEY'RE PAYING TAXES ON
THEIR WORLD-WIDE INCOME,,
THEY'RE SENDING THEIR CHILDREN
TO COLLEGE HERE AND PAYING FOR
COLLEGE EDUCATION, SO EACH
INVESTOR THAT'S COMING TO THE
UNITED STATES IS SPENDING OR
INVESTING A LOT MORE THAN WHAT
THE PROGRAM REQUIRES TO GET THE
GREEN CARD.
>> Reporter: THUS SENATORS
GRASSLEY AND PATRICK LEAHY HAVE
INTRODUCED A BILL TO AMEND THE
PROGRAM, INCREASE TRANSPARENCY
AND OVERSIGHT TO PREVENT FRAUD,
RAISE THE MINIMUM INVESTMENT TO
$800 THOUSAND FROM THE CURRENT
$500 THOUSAND FOR TARGETED
EMPLOYMENT AREAS, AND DEFINE
THOSE AREAS BY CENSUS TRACT-- NO
MORE BED-STUY BOOMERANGS.
BUT BACK IN BROOKLYN, JOURNALIST
NORM ODER REMAINS UNCONVINCED.
>> I THINK THERE SHOULD BE A
GIANT PAUSE AND RE-THINK THE
WHOLE THING.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE, THE
CLOCK IS TICKING TOWARD THE
DECEMBER 11 REAUTHORIZATION
DEADLINE.
THIS IS ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN, REPORTING FOR THE
PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: CONGRESS IS ON THE
VERGE OF FINALLY APPROVING A
REWRITE OF THE EDUCATION LAW
KNOWN AS NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND.
THE SENATE IS EXPECTED TO PASS
IT EASILY TOMORROW.
THE HOUSE DID SO LAST WEEK, AND
THE PRESIDENT IS EXPECTED TO
SIGN IT.
IT WILL GIVE STATES MORE CONTROL
OVER PUBLIC SCHOOLS, BUT STILL
REQUIRES ANNUAL STUDENT TESTING.
TESTS HAVE LONG BEEN THE SUBJECT
OF HEATED DEBATE, ESPECIALLY
THOSE TIED TO THE NEW AND MORE
AMBITIOUS COMMON CORE STANDARDS.
THIS FALL, RESULTS ARE COMING IN
FOR THE FIRST TIME, AND IN MANY
PLACES, THEY'VE BEEN
DISAPPOINTING.
THAT INCLUDES NEW JERSEY, WHERE
MANY PARENTS HAVE BEEN CONCERNED
ABOUT EXCESSIVE TESTING.
JOHN TULENKO OF EDUCATION WEEK
HAS THE STORY.
>> Reporter: THE COMMON CORE
STANDARDS, ADOPTED BY MOST
STATES FIVE YEARS AGO, RAISED
EXPECTATIONS FOR STUDENTS AND
LAUNCHED A MASSIVE EFFORT TO
CREATE NEW CURRICULUM AND TRAIN
TEACHERS TO TEACH IT.
NOW THE RESULTS OF COMMON CORE
TESTS ARE COMING IN, AND THEY'RE
FEELING LIKE A BUCKET OF COLD
WATER.
>> THE SCORES WILL SHOW THAT WE
HAVE GREAT CHALLENGES AHEAD...
>> Reporter: NEW JERSEY'S
EDUCATION COMMISSIONER DAVID
HESPE RECENTLY SHARED RESULTS
FROM HIS STATE.
IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE ARTS, FEWER
THAN HALF OF STUDENTS WERE
PROFICIENT.
AND IN MATH, ONLY ABOUT A THIRD,
A STEEP DECLINE IN PROFICIENCY
RATES COMPARED TO THE OLD STATE
TEST.
THE NUMBERS ARE SIMILAR IN MANY
OTHER STATES.
COMMISSIONER HESPE ASKED THE
PUBLIC NOT TO PANIC.
>> 'S TITHE FIRST YEAR OF AN
INITIAL TEST.
WE SHOULD BE HUMBLE, WE SHOULD
BE PATIENT, WE SHOULD TAKE OUR
TIME TO REVIEW ALL THIS
INFORMATION...
>> Reporter: TO HELP MAKE SENSE
OF ALL T
UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR DREW
GITOMER.
SO, FIRST QUESTION, WHAT'S IT
GOING TO MEAN FOR NEW JERSEY?
>> WELL, WHEN YOU RAISE THE
STANDARDS, AS THE COMMON CORE IS
TRYING TO DO, HAS BEEN TRYING TO
DO, YOU'RE JUDGING IT AGAINST A
HIGHER LEVEL OF EXPECTATIONS FOR
STUDENTS.
AND THERE MAY HAVE BEEN A FALSE
SENSE OF PROFICIENCY, UNDER THE
PREVIOUS STATE TESTING REGIME.
>> THIS IS HOW SPECIFIC THE DATA
IS...
>> Reporter: OFFICIALS IN NEW
JERSEY AND OTHER STATES ARE
COUNTING ON DATA FROM THE NEW
ONLINE TESTS, INCLUDING
P.A.R.C.C. AND SMARTER BALANCED,
TO SHOW TEACHERS THE WAY
FORWARD.
>> WE CAN USE THE INFORMATION
WE'RE GONNA BE GETTING FROM
P.A.R.C.C. TO HELP US CLOSE
CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION GAPS
IN INDIVIDUAL CLASSROOMS
THROUGHOUT THE STATE OF NEW
JERSEY.
OUR PRIOR TEST COULD NOT DO
THAT.
THIS TEST CAN.
>> Reporter: BUT EXPERTS LIKE
GITOMER AREN'T SO SURE THAT EVEN
HIGHLY SPECIALIZED TEST RESULTS
WILL MAKE A DIFFERENCE.
>> SIMPLY BY PROVIDING THAT
INFORMATION AND ASSUMING THAT
TEACHERS AND ADMINISTRATIVE
LEADERS HAVE THE CAPACITY TO
TAKE THAT INFORMATION AND
TRANSLATE IT INTO BETTER
PRACTICE SEEMS TO BE...
I'M SKEPTICAL OF THAT.
>> Reporter: WHY?
BECAUSE IT'S BEEN TRIED BEFORE.
MILLIONS OF STUDENTS HAVE
ALREADY BEEN TAKING, ON AVERAGE,
EIGHT STATE STANDARDIZED TESTS
PER YEAR.
AND FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS, THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S BEEN GIVING
A NATIONAL TEST, N.A.E.P., THAT
JUST SOUNDED THE ALARM AGAIN
ABOUT DISAPPOINTING RESULTS IN
MATH AND READING-- ESPECIALLY
FOR LOW INCOME AND SOME MINORITY
STUDENTS.
BUT PERFORMANCE ON THESE TESTS
HAS PROVEN VERY DIFFICULT TO
MOVE.
WHY SHOULD WE THINK IT'S GONNA
BE DIFFERENT THIS TIME AROUND?
>> THAT'S A VERY GOOD QUESTION.
THIS GOES BACK TO THE OLD CLICHE
THAT YOU DON'T FATTEN UP A PIG
BY WEIGHING IT ALL THE TIME.
>> Reporter: EVEN PRESIDENT
OBAMA RECENTLY SAID PUBLIC
SCHOOLS TEST TOO MUCH.
>> LEARNING IS ABOUT SO MUCH
MORE THAN FILLING IN THE RIGHT
BUBBLE.
>> Reporter: NO MORE THAN 2% OF
THE SCHOOL YEAR, THE PRESIDENT
NOW SAYS, SHOULD BE DEVOTED TO
STANDARDIZED TESTING.
SO IF TESTS AREN'T LIKELY TO
CHANGE THINGS, WHAT WILL?
>> I THINK WE WANT TO SPEND MORE
OF OUR EFFORT IN HIGH QUALITY
CURRICULA, NOT ON FINER AND
FINER DIAGNOSIS OF STUDENTS.
>> Reporter: THE COMMON CORE'S
ABOUT MORE THAN TESTS.
STATES USED MILLIONS OF THEIR
OWN MONEY, AND FEDERAL FUNDS, TO
TRAIN TEACHERS AND DEVELOP
CURRICULUM TO HELP STUDENTS MEET
THE NEW STANDARDS.
AND NEW JERSEY WANTS TO DO MORE.
>> WE HAVE TO LOOK AT SUPPORTS
FOR STUDENTS...
TIERED INTERVENTIONS FOR
STUDENTS.
WE NEED TO LOOK AT EXPANDING
THINGS LIKE EARLY CHILDHOOD
PROGRAMS...
>> Reporter: BUT IT'S NOT CLEAR
HOW NEW JERSEY WILL PAY FOR ALL
THIS.
FEDERAL GRANTS TO SUPPORT THE
COMMON CORE HAVE RUN OUT.
AND NEW JERSEY'S OWN GENERAL
AID, WHICH KEEPS SCHOOLS RUNNING
DAY IN, DAY OUT, IS STILL ABOUT
WHAT IT WAS IN 2009.
SIMILAR CONDITIONS IN MANY OTHER
STATES MAY LIMIT THEIR OPTIONS
TOO.
>> WITH THE COMMON CORE I THINK
THERE WAS A LOT OF WELL
INTENTIONED FOLKS WHO WERE
TRYING TO RAISE THE BAR AND USE
IT AS AN IMPETUS FOR IMPROVING
INSTRUCTION, BUT I DO THINK IF
YOU LOOK AT WHAT HAS HAPPENED IN
A VARIETY OF EXPENSIVE
INITIATIVES INCLUDING NO CHILD
LEFT BEHIND, THE EMPHASIS HAS
LARGELY BEEN ON THE TESTING AND
NOT ON WHAT TO DO ONCE WE GET
THE TEST RESULTS.
>> Reporter: STATES SAY THEY'LL
CONTINUE THEIR EFFORTS TO
IMPROVE INSTRUCTION AND HO TOPE
SEE BETTER RESULTS NEXT TIME
AROUND.
ONE STATE, OHIO, HAS TAKEN A
SHORT CUT: IT'S SIMPLY LOWERED
THE BAR BY SETTING MORE MODEST
PASS RATES.
AND NOT SURPRISINGLY, ITS
STUDENTS SEEM TO BE DOING
BETTER.
I'M JOHN TULENKO OF
EDUCATION WEEK, REPORTING FOR
THE PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: AN EXCEPTIONALLY
SEVERE WINTER IN MASSACHUSETTS.
A MINISTER'S DAUGHTER BEGAN TO
SCREAM AND WENT INTO
CONVULSIONS.
LESS THAN A YEAR LATER 19 MEN
AND WOMEN HAD BEEN HANGED AND
ONE MAN CRUSHED TO DEATH.
IT WAS THE SALEM WITCH TRAILS,
AND THEY ARE THE FOCUS OF THE
LATEST ADD TO THE NEWSHOUR
BOOKSHELF.
BIOGRAPHER STACY SCHIFF TURNS
HER GAZE ON "THE WITCHES: SALEM
1692."
SHE RECENTLY TALKED WITH JEFFREY
BROWN.
>> Brown: THE FIRST THING THAT
HITS ME HERE IS NINE MONTHS, ALL
OF THIS UNFOLDED IN NINE MONTHS,
IN ONE YEAR.
>> FRIGHTENING SPEED, RIGHT?
>> Brown: FRIGHTENING SPEED.
IT'S EXPONENTIAL.
IT BEGINS WITH TWO LITTLE GIRLS,
PRESUMABLY BEWITCHED, AND NAMES
BEGAN TO FLY ABOUT AND BEFORE
YOU KNOW IT YOU HAD THIS
EXPLOSIVE NUMBER OF ACCUSATIONS.
>> Brown: BEFORE YOU KNOW IT,
AND IT COMES TO AN END.
AND YET IT HAS LIVED ON.
>> IT'S INTERESTING.
IT'S A STUTTERING START.
IT FLINO OUT
VERY QUICKLY AS WELL AND LIVES
ON PARTLY BECAUSE WE THINK OF
THIS AS SOMETHING VERY UNLIKELY
TO HAVE HAPPENED IN ENLIGHTENED
AMERICA.
IT'S THE KIND OF THING THAT
HAPPENED IN THE MEDIEVAL WORLD
IN EUROPE, NOT ON OUR SHORES.
>> Brown: THERE ARE SO MANY
CHARACTERS.
IS THERE ONE YOU CAN REMEMBER
HITTING YOU IN THE GUT?
>> IN TERMS OF WHAT IS MOST
BEGUILING, THERE'S A MINISTER AT
THE CENTER OF THIS CRISIS
ACCUSED OF WITCHCRAFT AND HE'S
COMPELLING AND UNSUSPECTED
BECAUSE THE ACCUSED ARE ALL
WOMEN AND HERE YOU HAVE A
HARVARD-EDUCATED MINISTER WHO
HAS BEEN ACCUSED OF WITCHCRAFT
AND WHO IS SAID TO HAVE BEEN NOT
ONLY A WIZARD BUT A CONJURER, A
RANK ABOVE A WIZARD, AND IS
VESTED WITH THESE PARTICULARLY
TERRIFIC POWERS AND ALL FINGERS
SEEM TO POINT TO HIM.
H HE'S THE ONE WHO BEGINS TO
MINISTER DIABOLIC SABBATHS TO
SO-CALLED CONFESSERS IN THE
PARSONAGE FIELD.
>> Brown: IN LIFE IN THIS
COMMUNITY, DID THEY FEEL
FAMILIAR TO YOU OR DID IT FEEL
ALIEN?
>> IT'S FARTHER AWAY FROM OTHER
SUBJECTS I'VE WORKED ON
INTELLECTUALLY.
YOU HAVE TO GET INSIDE A PURITAN
MINDSET.
RELIGION IS PART OF THE
INTELLECTUAL HERITAGE.
BUT THEIR INSECURITIES AND
PREOCCUPATIONS AND THE GNAWING
NEED TO SOLVE A PUZZLE, THEY'RE
JUST LIKE US.
IN THAT WAY THEY STRIKE US AS
OUR COUSINS IN MANY WAYS.
>> Brown: ONE OF THE THINGS I
FIND INTERESTING FOR YOU AS THE
WRITER IS YOU HAVE TO MAKE A
DECISION ABOUT HOW TO TREAT
THEM, TO TREAT THEIR CRAZINESS,
IN A SENSE.
YOU, STACY SCHIFF, DO NOT
BELIEVE WOMEN RIDE AROUND ON
BROOMS IN THE NIGHT YET THOSE
PEOPLE DID.
>> I FELT LIKE IT WAS MY JOB TO
MAKE YOU UNDERSTAND THAT THEY
TRULY BELIEVED THIS.
THE WOMAN WHO CONFESS THEY DID
FLEW AROUND ON A POLE TO A
DIABOLICAL SABBATH AND THOSE ON
THE POLE WITH THEM BELIEVED TO
SOME EXTENT WHAT THEY WERE
SAYING.
YOU HAD TO BUY INTO THAT AND THE
IMAGERY AND UNDERSTAND WHY ALTHE
DELUSIONAL THINGS WERE
DELUSIONAL.
BUT YOU HAD TO MAKE THEM FEEL
REAL BEFORE YOU COULD DISCUSS
WHY THEY WERE CRAZY.
>> Brown: HOW DID YOU DECIDE
TO DO THAT?
>> A LOT OF IT DERIVES FROM WHAT
THEY'RE HEARING IN THE PULPIT
AND FROM PRIOR WITCHCRAFT CASES.
THE INTERESTING THING WITH
HISTORY, WE OFTEN APPLY A
PREVIOUS NARRATIVE TO WHAT WE
SEE IN FRONT OF US, AND THAT
HAPPENS HERE WHERE YOU HAVE THE
WHOLE TRANSFERENCE OF ANOTHER
WITCH CRACHT CRISIS TO 1692
SALEM AND YOU BEGIN TO SEE HOW
THE STORY BOILS AND HOW THE
IDEAS AND AGENDAS CONVERGE IN
SALEM.
>> Brown: IT'S SO DIFFERENT
FROM YOUR OTHER BOOKS WHEN
YOU'RE FOCUSING ON PARTICULARLY
ONE PERSON.
THIS IS A COMMUNITY.
>> THIS IS A TAP INDUSTRY.
>> Brown: A WHOLE TAP
INDUSTRY.
>> YEAH.
>> Brown: WAS IT INTERESTING
FOR YOU, HARDER FOR YOU?
>> IT'S FASCINATING THAT YOU CAN
SLIP FROM ONE SENSIBILITY TO THE
OTHER.
IF I GO TO A CROWDED COCKTAIL
PARTY INSTEAD OF AN INTIMATE
DINNER WITH ONE PERSON, WHICH I
LOVED, THERE IS RITUAL TO ME IN
MANY WAYS, BUT YOU HAVE TO
FIGURE OUT WHO'S GOING TO CARRY
YOUR STORY FORWARD, WHICH OF THE
VICTIMS YOU WASN'T TO WRITE
ABOUT, WHICH OF THE COURT
CONFIGURES THEY NEED TO HEAR AND
HOW MUCH TIME TO GIVE EACH OF
THOSE THINGS.
>> Brown: THERE ARE ALL KINDS
OF THEORIES AS TO HOW THIS COULD
HAVE HAPPENED.
WHERE DO YOU COME OUT?
>> YOU HAVE TO READ THE BOOK TO
GE WAYS.
EVERYONE HAS AN AGENDA.
THE AGENDA ISN'T ENTIRELY CLEAR.
THERE ARE VERY MUCH HIDDEN
AGENDAS.
THE GIRLS AND MINISTERS HAVE
THEIR REASONS, THE SPECIFIC
AUTHORITIES HAVE THEIR REASONS,
THE VILLAGERS HAVE THEIR REASONS
AND ALL OF THOSE REASONS AT A
PARTICULARLY VULNERABLE AND
EXPLOSIVE TIME FOR THE CONLEY
CONVERGE.
>> Brown: DID YOU WANT TO
FIGURE IT OUT OR NOT?
BECAUSE SOME THINGS ARE BETTER
LEFT TO SUCH A GREAT STORY.
>> NO, I MEAN, TO ME THIS
STRIKES ME AS A FAIRLY MONTHS
AND THOROUGH RESOLUTION OF THE
MYSTERY OF SALEM.
I THINK YOU COME AWAY THINKING,
NOW I SEE HOW THIS COULD HAVE
HAPPENED, HOW ALL OF THESE
THINGS COULD HAVE BUILT ONE UPON
ANOTHER, AND I THINK THERE ARE A
LOT OF FRESH THREADS TO THE TAP
INDUSTRY OF HOW THIS HAS COME TO
PLAY.
THE SIMPLISTIC EXPLANATIONS FAIL
US WHEN IT COMES TO AN INCIDENT
AS INCREDIBLY WIDESPREAD AS THIS
ONE.
>> Brown: AND THE FASCINATION
CONTINUES.
WE SOMEHOW FEEL THIS COULDN'T
HAVE HAPPENED IN OUR COUNTRY.
>> WE DON'T DO THIS KIND OF
THING.
HOW COULD OUR ENLIGHTENED
PURITAN ANCESTORS DO SUCH
THINGS?
HOW DO WE SEE THIS IN MODERN
TIME?
PART OF IT IS THE MYSTERY OF THE
MATTER, YOU KNOW, HOW COULD THIS
HAVE HAPPENED AND I DON'T REALLY
UNDERSTAND IT.
IT'S THE KIND OF UNCERTAINTY
THAT PEOPLE IN 1692 WERE ACCUSED
OF WITCHCRAFT.
>> Brown: AN AND IT'S BEEN TAKEN
UP IN BOOKS AND PLAYS.
>> SOME OF US NEVER OUTGROW OUR
FASCINATION WIT, CASE IN POINT.
>> Brown: THE BOOK, "THE
WITCHES."
STACY, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS, JEFF.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
JOIN US ONLINE, AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.